- One of the things I've noticed is that people are quite quick to blame
if young men are struggling,
if they're not in the labor market.
There's the eye roll and there's the,
"Well, if they could just get off the sofa
and stop smoking so much
weed and playing video games
all day, maybe they'd make
something of themselves."
It's interesting that
that instinct to blame
is really not as common
for other groups (chuckles)
as it is for young men.
It is not that these young
men just lack responsibility.
They don't care anymore.
They're just feckless, to
use that great old word.
(slow, dramatic music)
There's this kind of general
sense of a lot of young men
feeling a bit caught in the
a pinball machine, almost.
Like being told you're
too masculine on Tuesdays
and that you're not masculine
enough on Wednesdays.
The best way I think to think about
some of these men is lost.
And so this sense of, "What's
my place in the world,
why am I needed, what's my role
going to be going forward?"
that's a very real question that many men
and boys are genuinely struggling with.
It's made a lot of people realize
there are a lot of young men
out there who are up for grabs,
and that should send
some alarm bells ringing.
I'm Richard Reeves.
I'm president of the American
Institute for Boys and Men.
I'm also the author of
the book "Of Boys and Men:
Why the Modern Male Is
Struggling, Why That Matters,
and What To Do About It."
(screen clicking)
It's certainly clear
that the issues of boys
and men haven't gone away
in the last few years.
If anything, they're
getting even more attention,
which is good when it's the
right kind of attention.
That doesn't mean that it isn't still
a difficult conversation.
I think that a conversation
about the challenges
of boys and men should be difficult.
And so when we get into questions
around differences in
learning style or risk taking,
risk of addiction, competitiveness,
emotional vocabulary, et cetera,
we shouldn't immediately
assume that we are stereotyping
every man and woman into that role.
I get why people are worried about it
because there are always
going to be people
on the other end of the distribution,
but it does mean that we
should respect and acknowledge
where there are these
differences on average
between the two.
(pensive music)
As far as mental health is concerned,
I'm really troubled by a
lot of the trends we see
for both men and women, boys and girls.
I think it's true to say
that a lot more attention
is being paid particularly
to the mental health
of teen girls and young
women than is often the case
for teen boys and young men.
And so the mental health crisis
is playing out differently,
and that's very often I think
lost in the general debate.
One of the things that I've
discovered recently is the huge
rise in deaths from drug
poisoning among men,
that has increased sixfold since 2001.
We've lost an additional 400,000 men.
That's the difference,
the increase is 400,000.
400,000 men is exactly the same number
that we lost in World War II.
Drug poisoning deaths are up.
It is already the case that men account
for the majority of those deaths.
So men account for 70%
of drug poisoning deaths.
They account for 80%
of suicides in the US.
And one of the most troubling things
that we found in our
work is that, since 2010,
the rise in suicide has
been almost entirely driven
among young men.
So among young men below
the age of about 30,
the increase in suicides
has been almost a third.
Whereas up until 2010, this was the period
of Great Recession,
huge economic problems,
we saw a really big
increase in the suicide rate
among middle aged men.
But since 2010, something's happened.
The nature of the suicide
crisis among men has shifted
and we don't really know why.
We see a lot of attention
going to the issues
of teen girls in particular,
but less attention being
paid to the huge rise
in suicide rates, for
example, among teen boys
and young men.
We see a huge decline in the share
of male therapists and counselors.
Only one in five psychologists,
one in five social workers
and lower numbers of counselors are men.
And all of those numbers
have more than halved
just in the last few decades.
And that matters because for many men,
boys, depending on the
nature of their issue,
they may well find it easier
to talk to a male therapist.
And it's already difficult to get many men
to come forward and get help
for mental health problems.
They are much less likely
to do so than women.
(camera reel clicking)
(pensive music)
In 1971, men accounted for
slightly more than half,
56% of people doing a
psychology undergraduate degree.
Now it's 20% and falling.
In the space of a really
short period of time,
we've taken an area like psychology,
which used to be pretty gender balanced,
it was neither a male
nor a female profession,
and now it's becoming a female profession.
And I'm gonna risk saying that
the psychology profession
cratering the share of men
is as big a problem as
the lack of women in,
say, areas like tech or engineering,
where we're working very hard
and we have to make more progress.
And maybe it's even more important,
maybe that some of these
professions like teaching,
like mental health, maybe
those are professions
where representation matters even more,
representation of all kinds.
And so the alarm bells
should be ringing very loudly
when critical professions
like teaching, psychology
and social work are becoming
gendered right in front of us.
And we're not doing anything about that.
So we should be redoubling
our efforts to reach those men
and make it easier for them
to come through the door,
easier for them to put their hands up
and say that they're struggling.
One of the most important
things for anybody
is to be connected and have purpose,
to be, you know, doing
something that they value
and other people value with their lives.
And what we've seen is a
decline in the share of men
in the labor force.
The decline has been perhaps
most worrying among young men.
Now you might say, "Well,
fewer men are in the workforce
doing the kind of traditional male thing,
which has been the breadwinner."
But that's great because
they're now raising the kids
and maybe their partners or
their wives or girlfriends
are in the labor force
and it's been a swap.
(lighthearted music)
But that's not what we see.
We're not just talking
about non-employment.
We're talking about a break
from society more generally.
And we see that in all
kinds of other areas too.
So if you think about men
without a college degree,
for example, their wages
are no higher today
than they were in 1979.
That's almost half a century
of stagnant wages for most men.
And men who are born into
lower income families
are worse off on most measures than men
who are born just 15 years
earlier into those families.
For men at the top of the distribution,
men who've got college degrees,
who are in the labor market,
you know, they're doing better.
You continue to see their wages rising.
And it doesn't mean that
there aren't still challenges
for those men, but the sharp edge
of the issues facing boys and men
is absolutely being felt by the men
with the least economic power.
And of course there's so much more to do
for women at the top of the distribution.
Now, there aren't enough women CEOs,
there aren't enough women politicians.
We still don't have enough
female representation
in those senior positions
that you can very often
just be looking up and
seeing the lack of women.
But if you just pause for
a moment and look down,
look at those who are in less fortunate
economic circumstances than you,
that's when you really see the struggles
of men becoming most acute.
There are tens of millions
of working class men
and women struggling to figure
out this new labor market,
this new economy, and the
changes in the economy
have been particularly
brutal for working class men.
And so it's really important
to be able to hold both
of these thoughts in our
head, which is that of course
it matters that we need
to do more for women,
close the gender pay gap,
more representation of women
in those senior positions.
But I think it's a general
point that it's been a problem
for too many people that they focused
almost exclusively on the kind
of elite part of the problem,
the apex of our society.
And that has meant that there has been
a really dangerous neglect
of many of the problems
of people who are not worrying
about who's gonna be CEO.
They're worried about
who's gonna bring home
enough money to feed the kids this week.
- In this video, I'm gonna show you
how to get rich extremely quickly.
Now people say it's
impossible to get rich quick.
Well I did.
- Now I made my first million
dollars at 18 years old.
- I developed a blueprint.
- If you're a teenager in 2023,
becoming a millionaire is simple.
- There's something
else going on here too,
which is the get-rich-quick thing.
Online, there's a bit of
a culture around like men
need to get wealthy, they
need to do it quickly.
They don't wanna work for like corporates.
They don't wanna climb
their upper labor market.
They don't wanna start
in an entry-level job
and work their way up,
not when there are these
sort of very shiny objects online,
especially that could
make you rich quickly.
And of course there are examples online
of men who've done that
and who've managed to get
a lot of wealth very quickly.
They are the exception
that proves the rule.
- When you're in the stage
where you're still obsessed
over getting rich, it
should be the only thing
that you think about and the only thing
that you put your energy towards.
- And I worry a lot actually
that we have overdone the importance
of entrepreneurship in recent debates.
We've got entrepreneurship,
we need more entrepreneurs.
And that's how you get out of
poverty if you're a young man.
And that is almost certainly not true.
(gentle music)
And those algorithms
and those online platforms
are just very good at playing
into that higher risk appetite
among young men especially.
And it is a little bit like a fish hook.
It's a shiny object kind
of in the water and you go,
"Oh, oh, and that's gonna make me wealthy,
that's gonna solve my problem."
And you grab it and then,
and then you are hooked.
In states where you see sports
betting online going legal,
an increase in bankruptcies,
reduction in credit score
and general economic difficulties,
especially for young men
and especially for the
lower income young men.
Men are much more likely
to become addicted
to most things actually,
but especially to things
like online gambling.
And there are all kinds
of reasons for that
about the dopamine system,
especially among young men,
et cetera and this kind of high
that you get from the reward
of kind of a bet paying off, et cetera.
There's a reason why this
is predominantly a problem
among men, which is
men are more vulnerable
to that particular kind of risk,
that particular kind of addiction.
If we're not careful, these
conversations can shut
the conversation down
with boys and young men
rather than opening it up.
Sometimes parents sort
of react to discovering
that their son, for example,
is consuming video content
from somebody like Andrew Tate,
pretty well known misogynist influencer.
It's almost like they're
watching hardcore porn.
You know, they're sort
of, they slam the laptop
with the same kind of moral fervor,
and that's the wrong response.
It's a natural response,
it's the wrong response.
Instead, you've gotta have curiosity.
You've gotta figure out like,
"Well, why are you interested in this?"
Let's have the argument.
Because one of the things
that the most successful
reactionary online figures say
is nobody will want you to
talk about watching my stuff
or listening to my stuff.
If you even mention to somebody
that you are interested in
this, watch how they react.
You've just proved the point
that the reactionary was making.
And this is one of those
moments where it's hard,
but I'm speaking here as a
parent as much as a policy wonk,
is that you take some deep breaths,
you try to be open-minded,
and you try to become
an ally and a partner to your son
as they navigate this
difficult online world
and offline world.
So what does non-toxic
masculinity look like?
Being not toxic is not a
hugely aspirational goal
for many of us.
Like I didn't raise my sons and say,
"Just think boys one day,
you might not be poisonous."
I honestly believe that the
way to beat the online world
is offline, is in real life,
by having male teachers,
male coaches, fathers,
uncles, neighbors, et cetera,
just being a living and breathing version
of what it means to be a man.
I continue to believe
that in the long run,
boys, young men will believe their eyes
more than their ears.
And so if there isn't enough of a sense of
what does it mean to be
a man in my community,
in my home, in my school, et cetera,
if there's a lack of real life men
showing what it means to be a man
rather than telling you how to be a man,
then I think that creates a vacuum
which then gets filled by online figures.
Well, what should we do about it?
You're starting to see
people wanting to govern
around this issue, wanting to
make policy around this issue.
And some of the things they're
looking at are things like
increasing the share of men
in their mental health workforce,
having more targeted outreach programs
to do suicide prevention,
very specifically targeted,
are men who are at four times
of risk of losing their life
to suicide, especially young men,
and a big push around
getting more male teachers
into our classrooms.
There is something very
important about boys and girls
seeing education as something that both
men and women value and do.
Men actually make up
the minority of teachers
in basically every subject now,
including career and technical education.
It was 33% in the early 80s.
It's now 23% and falling.
(pensive music)
There are many fewer men in teaching now
than there are women in
the stem professions.
Also, I think that the
presence of men in schools
and in classrooms acts as a way
to have some actual role models
that are good alternative
to the ones online perhaps,
especially for boys
who don't have a father
figure in their lives
or a good relationship with their fathers.
One of the wonderful
things about male teachers
is that they're also coaches.
So about a third of the men
who are teaching K-12 are also coaching.
So the school bell
rings, they keep working,
they keep doing coaching,
and that's a great
additional benefit we get
from getting those men into teaching.
I also think that coaches
are mental health
professionals in disguise.
They're sitting shoulder to shoulder
on a bench or in a group,
they're working with
boys or with young men.
And they're very often noticing
that they're struggling,
and they can, in a very, very safe way,
in a non-threatening way,
they can open up a conversation with them.
And there's a reason I think
why so many men will say that a coach
played an hugely important
part in their role,
especially if they didn't have
a strong relationship with their father.
It's a trope at this point to say
that coaches are father figures,
but it's also a truth,
that for many boys they
absolutely do play that role.
One of the things we know is that men
communicate more
comfortably with each other
shoulder to shoulder as
opposed to face to face.
When men are face to face with each other,
that's quite a threatening position.
Now, if I tell you this, you
won't be able to unsee it.
Where every time you go to a social event,
if you want to communicate with young men,
go fishing, go for a drive, go for a hike.
A lot of psychologists now
will do the walk and talk therapy.
And so there's something
also about those activities,
whatever the activity is,
you're doing something
together shoulder to shoulder,
what you're actually doing
then is communicating.
I have a friend that
volunteers in a school,
and he goes into the school,
and he says, "Which boy are you having
the most trouble with?"
They identify the boy and he
just takes him for a walk.
He doesn't sit down with him,
he doesn't pull up a
chair in the classroom.
He certainly doesn't sit opposite him.
He finds that they're much
more likely to open up,
say, "Oh, let's just take
a walk and then talk."
You could roll your eyes at that
and just say, "Oh, what's wrong with men?"
But we have to be really careful
generally not to treat men
like defective women, or vice versa.
It's just that there are
some of these differences
between us that we
don't really think about
until it becomes an issue,
and which should just be part
of just a natural difference
between us that doesn't
in any way trap anybody.
I've asked a lot of men and boys,
"What do you like about
being a boy or a man?"
And it's really interesting how hard
it is to get people to
answer that question.
What's happened is that a
straightforward acknowledgement
of the ways in which men can be good
runs the risk of somehow
being seen as a claim
that they are therefore better than women.
But let's be specific.
It is true that men take more risks
than women on average.
Distributions overlap, but men
have a higher risk appetite.
Is that a good or a bad thing about men?
And the answer is yes,
it is a good and a bad thing about men.
It is good when it leads men to take risks
to save the lives of others.
It is bad if it means that they blow
all their money gambling,
or they take crazy risks
and end up drowning
or dying or ending up taking
drugs in a certain way.
And so is it better to have a more
stereotypically female
approach to risk or male?
And the answer is neither. We need both.
We need a society that actually
recognizes and honors both.
I have this very vivid memory of walking
with one of my sons into schools,
and we're walking down
this kinda long hallway,
and one side of the hallway is the place
where they had all the notice boards
for the things they were doing
for the girls in the school.
So there were girls on
the run, girls who code,
there was a women's
scholarship night coming up.
(pensive music)
And the opposite wall was, as
it happened, completely empty.
And it just had this real moment
of trying to see this through his eyes
and realizing that there is
an implicit message here,
which is we need to do
all this stuff for girls.
"The future is female," was
one of the signs on that wall.
And we don't need to do anything for boys
because the world is made for boys.
Men are gonna be fine.
And I really think that's out of date.
We've created a culture in our schools
where we are so concerned
rightly in many ways
about the prospects of women and girls
that we haven't allowed the
data to catch up with that
and say, "Yeah, but boys are now
way behind girls in school."
If you take something like GPA,
which is a pretty good measure
of overall high school achievement,
if you take the top 10%
of students, two thirds of them are girls.
And if you take the
bottom 10% of students,
two thirds of them are boys.
Pretty straight line
relationship between them.
In the average school district in the US,
the girls are almost a grade
level ahead in English.
There's no gap in math.
In the poorest school districts,
the boys are behind in
both English and math.
And so we just have to be
careful not to inadvertently
send the message to boys
that they're kind of
just not as seen or they're not as heard
or they're not as valued
in the school setting.
How do we maintain this
really wonderful idea
of the empowering and uplifting atmosphere
that I think we've had around
women and girls in schools,
but do the same for boys and
try and create this sense of it
being uplifting for both.
I didn't think about this at
all when I was younger myself.
Like, "The future is female"
is probably something
I would've gone along with,
like as a good male feminist or whatever.
But actually that's a terrible phrase.
Like, the future can't be female or male.
It has to be for everybody.
We have got to update the
way we talk about this.
way we think about this
and to do so in a way that
in no way puts the brakes on
girls and women, but which
doesn't inadvertently,
in our efforts to promote women and girls,
send this message to boys and men
either that they don't matter as much
or that they don't need as much.
And neither of those things are true.
- [Announcer] Wanna support the channel?
Join the Big Think Members Community
where you get access to
videos early ad free.